Basic instructions 8
8.1 Bit logic operations
8.1.1 Bit logic instructions
LAD and FBD are very effective  for handling Boolean logic. While SCL is especially effective  for 
complex mathematical computation and for project control structures, you can use SCL for 
Boolean logic.
LAD contacts
Table 8-1 Normally open and normally closed contacts
LAD SCL Description
IF in THEN
     Statement;
ELSE
     Statement;
END_IF;Normally open and normally closed contacts: You can connect contacts to 
other contacts and create your own combination logic. If the input bit you 
specify uses memory identifier  I (input) or Q (output), then the bit value is 
read from the process-image register. The physical contact signals in your 
control process are wired to I terminals on the PLC. The CPU scans the wired 
input signals and continuously updates the corresponding state values in 
the process-image input register.       
You can perform an immediate read of a physical input using ":P" following 
the I offset  (example: "%I3.4:P"). For an immediate read, the bit data values 
are read directly from the physical input instead of the process image. An 
immediate read does not update the process image.
IF NOT (in) THEN
     Statement;
ELSE
     Statement;
END_IF;
Table 8-2 Data types for the parameters
Parameter Data type Description
IN Bool Assigned bit
• The Normally Open contact is closed (ON) when the assigned bit value is equal to 1.
• The Normally Closed contact is closed (ON) when the assigned bit value is equal to 0.
• Contacts connected in series create AND logic networks.
• Contacts connected in parallel create OR logic networks.
S7-1200 Programmable controller
System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO 197
FBD AND, OR, and XOR boxes
In FBD programming, LAD contact networks are transformed into AND (&), OR (>=1), and 
EXCLUSIVE OR (x) box networks where you can specify bit values for the box inputs and outputs. 
You may also connect to other logic boxes and create your own logic combinations. After the box 
is placed in your network, you can drag the "Insert input" tool from the "Favorites" toolbar or 
instruction tree and then drop it onto the input side of the box to add more inputs. You can also 
right-click on the box input connector and select "Insert input".
Box inputs and outputs can be connected to another logic box, or you can enter a bit address or 
bit symbol name for an unconnected input. When the box instruction is executed, the current 
input states are applied to the binary box logic and, if true, the box output will be true.
Table 8-3 AND, OR, and XOR boxes
FBD SCL1Description
out := in1 AND in2; All inputs of an AND box must be TRUE for the output to be TRUE.
out := in1 OR in2; Any input of an OR box must be TRUE for the output to be TRUE.
out := in1 XOR in2; An odd number of the inputs of an XOR box must be TRUE for the 
output to be TRUE.
1For SCL: You must assign the result of the operation to a variable to be used for another statement.
Table 8-4 Data types for the parameters
Parameter Data type Description
IN1, IN2 Bool Input bit
NOT logic inverter
Table 8-5 Invert RLO (Result of Logic Operation)
LAD FBD SCL Description
NOT For FBD programming, you can drag the "Invert RLO" tool from 
the "Favorites" toolbar or instruction tree and then drop it on an 
input or output to create a logic inverter on that box connector.
The LAD NOT contact inverts the logical state of power flow  
input.
•If there is no power flow  into the NOT contact, then there is 
power flow  out.
•If there is power flow  into the NOT contact, then there is no 
power flow  out.
Basic instructions
8.1 Bit logic operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
198 System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO
Output coil and assignment box
The coil output instruction writes a value for an output bit. If the output bit you specify uses 
memory identifier  Q, then the CPU turns the output bit in the process-image register on or off, 
setting the specified  bit equal to power flow  status. The output signals for your control actuators 
are wired to the Q terminals of the CPU. In RUN mode, the CPU system continuously scans your 
input signals, processes the input states according to your program logic, and then reacts by 
setting new output state values in the process-image output register. The CPU system transfers 
the new output state reaction that is stored in the process-image register, to the wired output 
terminals.
Table 8-6 Assignment and negate assignment
LAD FBD SCL Description
out := <Boolean 
expression>;In FBD programming, LAD coils are transformed into assign‐
ment (= and /=) boxes where you specify a bit address for the 
box output. Box inputs and outputs can be connected to 
other box logic or you can enter a bit address.
You can specify an immediate write of a physical output 
using ":P" following the Q offset  (example: "%Q3.4:P"). For 
an immediate write, the bit data values are written to the 
process image output and directly to physical output.
out := 
NOT <Boolean 
expression>;
Table 8-7 Data types for the parameters
Parameter Data type Description
OUT Bool Assigned bit
•If there is power flow  through an output coil or an FBD "=" box is enabled, then the output bit 
is set to 1.
•If there is no power flow  through an output coil or an FBD "=" assignment box is not enabled, 
then the output bit is set to 0.
•If there is power flow  through an inverted output coil or an FBD "/=" box is enabled, then the 
output bit is set to 0.
• If there is no power flow  through an inverted output coil or an FBD "/=" box is not enabled, 
then the output bit is set to 1.Basic instructions
8.1 Bit logic operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO 199
8.1.2 Set and reset instructions
Set and Reset 1 bit
Table 8-8 S and R instructions
LAD FBD SCL Description
Not available Set output:
When S (Set) is activated, then the data value at the OUT address 
is set to 1. When S is not activated, OUT is not changed.         
Not available Reset output:
When R (Reset) is activated, then the data value at the OUT ad‐
dress is set to 0. When R is not activated, OUT is not changed.
1For LAD and FBD: These instructions can be placed anywhere in the network.
2For SCL: You must write code to replicate this function within your application.
Table 8-9 Data types for the parameters
Parameter Data type Description
IN (or connect to contact/gate logic) Bool Bit tag of location to be monitored
OUT Bool Bit tag of location to be set or reset
Set and Reset Bit Field
Table 8-10 SET_BF and RESET_BF instructions
LAD1FBD SCL Description
Not available Set bit field:
When SET_BF is activated, a data value of 1 is assigned to "n" bits 
starting at address tag OUT. When SET_BF is not activated, OUT 
is not changed.
Not available Reset bit field:
RESET_BF writes a data value of 0 to "n" bits starting at address 
tag OUT. When RESET_BF is not activated, OUT is not changed.
1For LAD and FBD: These instructions must be the right-most instruction in a branch.
2For SCL: You must write code to replicate this function within your application.
Table 8-11 Data types for the parameters
Parameter Data type Description
OUT Bool Starting element of a bit field to be set or reset (Example: #MyAr‐
ray[3])
n Constant (UInt) Number of bits to writeBasic instructions
8.1 Bit logic operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
200 System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO
Set-dominant and Reset-dominant flip-flops
Table 8-12 RS and SR instructions
LAD / FBD SCL Description
Not available Reset/set flip-flop:
RS is a set dominant latch where the set dominates. If the set (S1) and reset (R) 
signals are both true, the value at address INOUT will be 1.
Not available Set/reset flip-flop:
SR is a reset dominant latch where the reset dominates. If the set (S) and reset (R1) 
signals are both true, the value at address INOUT will be 0.
1For LAD and FBD: These instructions must be the right-most instruction in a branch.
2For SCL: You must write code to replicate this function within your application.
Table 8-13 Data types for the parameters
Parameter Data type Description
S, S1 Bool Set input; 1 indicates dominance
R, R1 Bool Reset input; 1 indicates dominance
INOUT Bool Assigned bit tag "INOUT"
Q Bool Follows state of "INOUT" bit
The "INOUT" tag assigns the bit address that is set or reset. The optional output Q follows the 
signal state of the "INOUT" address.
Instruction S1 R "INOUT" bit  
RS 0 0 Previous state  
 0 1 0  
 1 0 1  
 1 1 1  
 S R1   
SR 0 0 Previous state  
 0 1 0  
 1 0 1  
 1 1 0  Basic instructions
8.1 Bit logic operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO 201
8.1.3 Positive and negative edge instructions
Table 8-14 Positive and negative transition detection
LAD FBD SCL Description
Not available 1Scan operand for positive signal edge.
LAD: The state of this contact is TRUE when a positive transition (OFF-to-
ON) is detected on the assigned "IN" bit. The contact logic state is then 
combined with the power flow  in state to set the power flow  out state. The 
P contact can be located anywhere in the network except the end of a 
branch.     
FBD: The output logic state is TRUE when a positive transition (OFF-to-ON) 
is detected on the assigned input bit. The P box can only be located at the 
beginning of a branch.
Not available 1Scan operand for negative signal edge.
LAD: The state of this contact is TRUE when a negative transition (ON-to-
OFF) is detected on the assigned input bit. The contact logic state is then 
combined with the power flow  in state to set the power flow  out state. The 
N contact can be located anywhere in the network except the end of a 
branch.     
FBD: The output logic state is TRUE when a negative transition (ON-to-
OFF) is detected on the assigned input bit. The N box can only be located 
at the beginning of a branch.
Not available 1Set operand on positve signal edge.
LAD: The assigned bit "OUT" is TRUE when a positive transition (OFF-to-
ON) is detected on the power flow  entering the coil. The power flow  in 
state always passes through the coil as the power flow  out state. The P coil 
can be located anywhere in the network.
FBD: The assigned bit "OUT" is TRUE when a positive transition (OFF-to-
ON) is detected on the logic state at the box input connection or on the 
input bit assignment if the box is located at the start of a branch. The input 
logic state always passes through the box as the output logic state. The P= 
box can be located anywhere in the branch.
Not available 1Set operand on negative signal edge.
LAD: The assigned bit "OUT" is TRUE when a negative transition (ON-to-
OFF) is detected on the power flow  entering the coil. The power flow  in 
state always passes through the coil as the power flow  out state. The N coil 
can be located anywhere in the network.
FBD: The assigned bit "OUT" is TRUE when a negative transition (ON-to-
OFF) is detected on the logic state at the box input connection or on the 
input bit assignment if the box is located at the start of a branch. The input 
logic state always passes through the box as the output logic state. The N= 
box can be located anywhere in the branch.
1For SCL: You must write code to replicate this function within your application.Basic instructions
8.1 Bit logic operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
202 System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO
Table 8-15 P_TRIG and N_TRIG  
LAD / FBD SCL Description
Not available 1Scan RLO (result of logic operation) for positve signal edge.
The Q output power flow  or logic state is TRUE when a positive transition 
(OFF-to-ON) is detected on the CLK input state (FBD) or CLK power flow  in 
(LAD).       
In LAD, the P_TRIG instruction cannot be located at the beginning or end 
of a network. In FBD, the P_TRIG instruction can be located anywhere 
except the end of a branch.
Not available 1Scan RLO for negative signal edge.
The Q output power flow  or logic state is TRUE when a negative transition 
(ON-to-OFF) is detected on the CLK input state (FBD) or CLK power flow  in 
(LAD).      
In LAD, the N_TRIG instruction cannot be located at the beginning or end 
of a network. In FBD, the N_TRIG instruction can be located anywhere 
except the end of a branch.
1For SCL: You must write code to replicate this function within your application.
Table 8-16 R_TRIG and F_TRIG instructions
LAD / FBD SCL Description
"R_TRIG_DB"(
  CLK:=_in_,
  Q=> _bool_out_);Set tag on positive signal edge.
The assigned instance DB is used to store the previous state of the CLK 
input. The Q output power flow  or logic state is TRUE when a positive 
transition (OFF-to-ON) is detected on the CLK input state (FBD) or CLK 
power flow  in (LAD).
In LAD, the R_TRIG instruction cannot be located at the beginning or end of 
a network. In FBD, the R_TRIG instruction can be located anywhere except 
the end of a branch.
"F_TRIG_DB"(
  CLK:=_in_,
  Q=> _bool_out_);Set tag on negative signal edge.
The assigned instance DB is used to store the previous state of the CLK 
input. The Q output power flow  or logic state is TRUE when a negative 
transition (ON-to-OFF) is detected on the CLK input state (FBD) or CLK 
power flow  in (LAD).       
In LAD, the F_TRIG instruction cannot be located at the beginning or end of 
a network. In FBD, the F_TRIG instruction can be located anywhere except 
the end of a branch.
For R_TRIG and F_TRIG, when you insert the instruction in the program, the "Call options" dialog 
opens automatically. In this dialog you can assign
whether the edge memory bit is stored in its own data block (single instance) or as a local tag 
(multiple instance) in the
block interface. If you create a separate data block, you will find it in the project tree in the Basic instructions
8.1 Bit logic operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO 203
"Program resources" folder
under "Program blocks > System blocks".
Table 8-17 Data types for the parameters (P and N contacts/coils, P=, N=, P_TRIG and N_TRIG) 
Parameter Data type Description
M_BIT Bool Memory bit in which the previous state of the input is saved
IN Bool Input bit whose transition edge is detected
OUT Bool Output bit which indicates a transition edge was detected
CLK Bool Power flow  or input bit whose transition edge is detected
Q Bool Output which indicates an edge was detected 
All edge instructions use a memory bit (M_BIT: P/N contacts/coils, P_TRIG/N_TRIG) or (instance 
DB bit: R_TRIG, F_TRIG) to store the previous state of the monitored input signal. An edge is 
detected by comparing the state of the input with the previous state. If the states indicate a 
change of the input in the direction of interest, then an edge is reported by writing the output 
TRUE. Otherwise, the output is written to FALSE.
Note
Edge instructions evaluate the input and memory-bit values each time they are executed, 
including the first execution. You must account for the initial states of the input and memory bit 
in your program design either to allow or to avoid edge detection on the first scan.
Because the memory bit must be maintained from one execution to the next, you should use a 
unique bit for each edge instruction, and you should not use this bit any other place in your 
program. You should also avoid temporary memory and memory that can be affected  by other 
system functions, such as an I/O update. Use only M, global DB, or Static memory (in an instance 
DB) for M_BIT memory assignments.Basic instructions
8.1 Bit logic operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
204 System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO
8.2 Timer operations
You use the timer instructions to create programmed time delays. The number of timers that you 
can use in your user program is limited only by the amount of memory in the CPU. Each timer 
uses a 16 byte IEC_Timer data type DB structure to store timer data that is specified  at the top of 
the box or coil instruction. STEP 7 automatically creates the DB when you insert the instruction.
Table 8-18 Timer instructions
LAD / FBD boxes LAD coils SCL Description
"IEC_Timer_0_DB".TP(
    IN:=_bool_in_,
    PT:=_time_in_,
    Q=>_bool_out_,
    ET=>_time_out_);The TP timer generates a pulse with a preset width 
time. 
"IEC_Timer_0_DB".TON (
    IN:=_bool_in_,
    PT:=_time_in_,
    Q=>_bool_out_,
    ET=>_time_out_);The TON timer sets output Q to ON after a preset 
time delay. 
"IEC_Timer_0_DB".TOF (
    IN:=_bool_in_,
    PT:=_time_in_, 
    Q=>_bool_out_, 
    ET=>_time_out_);The TOF timer resets output Q to OFF after a preset 
time delay. 
"IEC_Timer_0_DB".TONR (
    IN:=_bool_in_,
    R:=_bool_in_,
    PT:=_time_in_,
    Q=>_bool_out_,
    ET=>_time_out_);The TONR timer sets output Q to ON after a preset 
time delay.  Elapsed time is accumulated over mul‐
tiple timing periods until the R input is used to reset 
the elapsed time.
FBD only: 
 PRESET_TIMER(
    PT:=_time_in_,
    TIMER:=_iec_timer_in
_);The PT (Preset timer) coil loads a new PRESET time 
value in the specified  IEC_Timer.
FBD only: 
 RESET_TIMER(
     _iec_timer_in_);The RT (Reset timer) coil resets the specified  
IEC_Timer.
1STEP 7 automatically creates the DB when you insert the instruction.
2 In the SCL examples, "IEC_Timer_0_DB" is the name of the instance DB.Basic instructions
8.2 Timer operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO 205
Table 8-19 Data types for the parameters
Parameter Data type Description
Box: IN
Coil: Power flowBool TP, TON, and TONR:
Box: 0=Disable timer, 1=Enable timer
Coil: No power flow=Disable  timer, Power flow=Enable  timer
TOF:
Box: 0=Enable timer, 1=Disable timer
Coil: No power flow=Enable  timer, Power flow=Disable  timer
R Bool TONR box only:
0=No reset
1= Reset elapsed time and Q bit to 0
Box: PT
Coil: "PRESET_Tag"Time Timer box or coil: Preset time input
Box: Q 
Coil: DBdata.QBool Timer box: Q box output or Q bit in the timer DB data
Timer coil: you can only address the Q bit in the timer DB data
Box: ET
Coil: DBdata.ETTime Timer box: ET (elapsed time) box output or ET time value in the timer DB data
Timer coil: you can only address the ET time value in the timer DB data. 
Table 8-20 Effect  of value changes in the PT and IN parameters
Timer Changes in the PT and IN box parameters and the corresponding coil parameters
TP • Changing PT has no effect  while the timer runs.
• Changing IN has no effect  while the timer runs.
TON • Changing PT has no effect  while the timer runs.
• Changing IN to FALSE, while the timer runs, resets and stops the timer.
TOF • Changing PT has no effect  while the timer runs.
• Changing IN to TRUE, while the timer runs, resets and stops the timer.
TONR • Changing PT has no effect  while the timer runs, but has an effect  when the timer resumes.
•Changing IN to FALSE, while the timer runs, stops the timer but does not reset the timer. Changing IN 
back to TRUE will cause the timer to start timing from the accumulated time value.
PT (preset time) and ET (elapsed time) values are stored in the specified  IEC_TIMER DB data as 
signed double integers that represent milliseconds of time. TIME data uses the T# identifier  and 
can be entered as a simple time unit (T#200ms or 200) and as compound time units like 
T#2s_200ms.
Table 8-21 Size and range of the TIME data type
Data type Size Valid number ranges1
TIME 32 bits, stored as 
DInt dataT#-24d_20h_31m_23s_648ms to T#24d_20h_31m_23s_647ms
Stored as -2,147,483,648 ms to +2,147,483,647 ms
1The negative range of the TIME data type shown above cannot be used with the timer instructions. Negative PT (preset time) 
values are set to zero when the timer instruction is executed. ET (elapsed time) is always a positive value.Basic instructions
8.2 Timer operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
206 System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO
Timer coil example
The -(TP)-, -(TON)-, -(TOF)-, and -(TONR)- timer coils must be the last instruction in a LAD 
network. As shown in the timer example, a contact instruction in a subsequent network 
evaluates the Q bit in a timer coil's IEC_Timer DB data. Likewise, you must address the ELAPSED 
element in the IEC_timer DB data if you want to use the elapsed time value in your program.
The pulse timer is started on a 0 to 1 transition of the Tag_Input bit value. The timer runs for the 
time specified  by Tag_Time time value.
As long as the timer runs, the state of DB1.MyIEC_Timer.Q=1 and the Tag_Output value=1. 
When the Tag_Time value has elapsed, then DB1.MyIEC_Timer.Q=0 and the Tag_Output 
value=0.
Reset timer -(RT)- and Preset timer -(PT)- coils
These coil instructions can be used with box or coil timers and can be placed in a mid-line 
position. The coil output power flow  status is always the same as the coil input status. When the 
-(RT)- coil is activated, the ELAPSED time element of the specified  IEC_Timer DB data is reset to 
0. When the -(PT)- coil is activated, the PRESET time element of the specified  IEC_Timer DB data 
is loaded with the assigned time-duration value..
Note
When you place timer instructions in an FB, you can select the "Multi-instance data block" option. 
The timer structure names can be different  with separate data structures, but the timer data is 
contained in a single data block and does not require a separate data block for each timer. This 
reduces the processing time and data storage necessary for handling the timers. There is no 
interaction between the timer data structures in the shared multi-instance DB.Basic instructions
8.2 Timer operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO 207
Operation of the timers
Table 8-22 Types of IEC timers
Timer Timing diagram
TP: Generate pulse
The TP timer generates a pulse with a preset width time.
,1
4(7
37
37 37 37
TON : Generate ON-delay
The TON timer sets output Q to ON after a preset time 
delay.
,1
4(7
3737
37
TOF: Generate OFF-delay
The TOF timer resets output Q to OFF after a preset time 
delay.
,1
4(7
3737
37
TONR : Time accumulator
The TONR timer sets output Q to ON after a preset time 
delay. Elapsed time is accumulated over multiple timing 
periods until the R input is used to reset the elapsed time.
,1
4
5(737Basic instructions
8.2 Timer operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
208 System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO
Note
In the CPU, no dedicated resource is allocated to any specific  timer instruction. Instead, each 
timer utilizes its own timer structure in DB memory and a continuously-running internal CPU 
timer to perform timing. 
When a timer is started due to an edge change on the input of a TP, TON, TOF, or TONR 
instruction, the value of the continuously-running internal CPU timer is copied into the START 
member of the DB structure allocated for this timer instruction. This start value remains 
unchanged while the timer continues to run, and is used later each time the timer is updated. 
Each time the timer is started, a new start value is loaded into the timer structure from the 
internal CPU timer.
When a timer is updated, the start value described above is subtracted from the current value of 
the internal CPU timer to determine the elapsed time. The elapsed time is then compared with 
the preset to determine the state of the timer Q bit. The ELAPSED and Q members are then 
updated in the DB structure allocated for this timer. Note that the elapsed time is clamped at the 
preset value (the timer does not continue to accumulate elapsed time after the preset is 
reached).               
A timer update is performed when and only when:
• A timer instruction (TP, TON, TOF, or TONR) is executed
• The "ELAPSED" member of the timer structure in DB is referenced directly by an instruction
• The "Q" member of the timer structure in DB is referenced directly by an instruction
Timer programming 
The following consequences of timer operation should be considered when planning and 
creating your user program:
•You can have multiple updates of a timer in the same scan. The timer is updated each time 
the timer instruction (TP, TON, TOF, TONR) is executed and each time the ELAPSED or Q 
member of the timer structure is used as a parameter of another executed instruction. This 
is an advantage if you want the latest time data (essentially an immediate read of the timer). 
However, if you desire to have consistent values throughout a program scan, then place your 
timer instruction prior to all other instructions that need these values, and use tags from the 
Q and ET outputs of the timer instruction instead of the ELAPSED and Q members of the timer 
DB structure.
•You can have scans during which no update of a timer occurs. It is possible to start your timer 
in a function, and then cease to call that function again for one or more scans. If no other 
instructions are executed which reference the ELAPSED or Q members of the timer structure, 
then the timer will not be updated. A new update will not occur until either the timer 
instruction is executed again or some other instruction is executed using ELAPSED or Q from 
the timer structure as a parameter.Basic instructions
8.2 Timer operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO 209
• Although not typical, you can assign the same DB timer structure to multiple timer 
instructions. In general, to avoid unexpected interaction, you should only use one timer 
instruction (TP, TON, TOF, TONR) per DB timer structure.
• Self-resetting timers are useful to trigger actions that need to occur periodically. Typically, 
self-resetting timers are created by placing a normally-closed contact which references the 
timer bit in front of the timer instruction. This timer network is typically located above one 
or more dependent networks that use the timer bit to trigger actions. When the timer expires 
(elapsed time reaches preset value), the timer bit is ON for one scan, allowing the dependent 
network logic controlled by the timer bit to execute. Upon the next execution of the timer 
network, the normally closed contact is OFF, thus resetting the timer and clearing the timer 
bit. The next scan, the normally closed contact is ON, thus restarting the timer. When 
creating self-resetting timers such as this, do not use the "Q" member of the timer DB 
structure as the parameter for the normally-closed contact in front of the timer instruction. 
Instead, use the tag connected to the "Q" output of the timer instruction for this purpose. The 
reason to avoid accessing the Q member of the timer DB structure is because this causes an 
update to the timer and if the timer is updated due to the normally closed contact, then the 
contact will reset the timer instruction immediately. The Q output of the timer instruction will 
not be ON for the one scan and the dependent networks will not execute.
Time data retention after a RUN-STOP-RUN transition or a CPU power cycle
If a run mode session is ended with stop mode or a CPU power cycle and a new run mode session 
is started, then the timer data stored in the previous run mode session is lost, unless the timer 
data structure is specified  as retentive (TP, TON, TOF, and TONR timers). 
When you accept the defaults in the call options dialog after you place a timer instruction in the 
program editor, you are automatically assigned an instance DB which cannot be made 
retentive . To make your timer data retentive, you must either use a global DB or a Multi-instance 
DB.Basic instructions
8.2 Timer operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
210 System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO
Assign a global DB to store timer data as retentive data 
This option works regardless of where the timer is placed (OB, FC, or FB).
1. Create a global DB:
– Double-click "Add new block" from the Project tree
– Click the data block (DB) icon
– For the Type, choose global DB
–If you want to be able to select individual data elements in this DB as retentive, be sure the 
DB type "Optimized" box is checked. The other DB type option "Standard - compatible with 
S7-300/400" only allows setting all DB data elements retentive or none retentive.
– Click OK
2. Add timer structure(s) to the DB:
– In the new global DB, add a new static tag using data type IEC_Timer.
– In the "Retain" column, check the box so that this structure will be retentive.
–Repeat this process to create structures for all the timers that you want to store in this DB. 
You can either place each timer structure in a unique global DB, or you can place multiple 
timer structures into the same global DB. You can also place other static tags besides 
timers in this global DB. Placing multiple timer structures into the same global DB allows 
you to reduce your overall number of blocks.
– Rename the timer structures if desired.
3.Open the program block for editing where you want to place a retentive timer (OB, FC, or FB).
4. Place the timer instruction at the desired location.
5. When the call options dialog appears, click the cancel button.
6.On the top of the new timer instruction, type the name (do not use the helper to browse) of 
the global DB and timer structure that you created above (example: "Data_block_3.Static_1").
Assign a multi-instance DB to store timer data as retentive data 
This option only works if you place the timer in an FB.
This option depends upon whether the FB properties specify "Optimized block access" (allows 
symbolic access only). To verify how the access attribute is configured  for an existing FB, right-
click on the FB in the Project tree, choose properties, and then choose Attributes.
If the FB specifies  "Optimized block access" (allows symbolic access only):
1. Open the FB for edit.
2. Place the timer instruction at the desired location in the FB.
3.When the Call options dialog appears, click the Multi instance icon. The Multi Instance option 
is only available if the instruction is being placed into an FB.
4. In the Call options dialog, rename the timer if desired.
5.Click OK. The timer instruction appears in the editor, and the IEC_TIMER structure appears in 
the FB Interface under Static.Basic instructions
8.2 Timer operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO 211
6.If necessary, open the FB interface editor (may have to click on the small arrow to expand the 
view).
7. Under Static, locate the timer structure that was just created for you.
8.In the Retain column for this timer structure, change the selection to "Retain". Whenever this 
FB is called later from another program block, an instance DB will be created with this 
interface definition  which contains the timer structure marked as retentive.
If the FB does not specify "Optimized block access", then the block access type is standard, which 
is compatible with S7-300/400 classic configurations  and allows symbolic and direct access. To 
assign a multi-instance to a standard block access FB, follow these steps:
1. Open the FB for edit.
2. Place the timer instruction at the desired location in the FB.
3. When the Call options dialog appears, click on the multi instance icon. The multi instance 
option is only available if the instruction is being placed into an FB.
4. In the Call options dialog, rename the timer if desired.
5.Click OK. The timer instruction appears in the editor, and the IEC_TIMER structure appears in 
the FB Interface under Static.
6. Open the block that will use this FB.
7.Place this FB at the desired location. Doing so results in the creation of an instance data block 
for this FB.
8. Open the instance data block created when you placed the FB in the editor.
9. Under Static, locate the timer structure of interest. In the Retain column for this timer 
structure, check the box to make this structure retentive.Basic instructions
8.2 Timer operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
212 System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO
8.3 Counter operations
Table 8-23 Counter instructions
LAD / FBD SCL Description
"IEC_Counter_0_DB".CT
U(
    CU:=_bool_in, 
    R:=_bool_in, 
    PV:=_in, 
    Q=>_bool_out, 
    CV=>_out);Use the counter instructions to count internal program events and ex‐
ternal process events. Each counter uses a structure stored in a data 
block to maintain counter data. You assign the data block when the 
counter instruction is placed in the editor. 
• CTU is a count-up counter
• CTD is a count-down counter
• CTUD is a count-up-and-down counter
"IEC_Counter_0_DB".CT
D(
    CD:=_bool_in, 
    LD:=_bool_in, 
    PV:=_in, 
    Q=>_bool_out, 
    CV=>_out);
"IEC_Counter_0_DB".CTU
D(
    CU:=_bool_in, 
    CD:=_bool_in,
    R:=_bool_in, 
    LD:=_bool_in,
    PV:=_in_, 
    QU=>_bool_out, 
    QD=>_bool_out,
    CV=>_out_);
1For LAD and FBD: Select the count value data type from the drop-down list below the instruction name.
2STEP 7 automatically creates the DB when you insert the instruction.
3 In the SCL examples, "IEC_Counter_0_DB" is the name of the instance DB.
Table 8-24 Data types for the parameters
Parameter Data type1Description
CU, CD Bool Count up or count down, by one count
R (CTU, CTUD) Bool Reset count value to zero
LD (CTD, CTUD) Bool Load control for preset value
PV SInt, Int, DInt, USInt, UInt, UDInt Preset count value
Q, QU Bool True if CV >= PV
QD Bool True if CV <= 0
CV SInt, Int, DInt, USInt, UInt, UDInt Current count value
1The numerical range of count values depends on the data type you select. If the count value is an unsigned integer type, you 
can count down to zero or count up to the range limit. If the count value is a signed integer, you can count down to the 
negative integer limit and count up to the positive integer limit.Basic instructions
8.3 Counter operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO 213
The number of counters that you can use in your user program is limited only by the amount of 
memory in the CPU. Counters use the following amount of memory:
• For SInt or USInt data types, the counter instruction uses 3 bytes.
• For Int or UInt data types, the counter instruction uses 6 bytes.
• For DInt or UDInt data types, the counter instruction uses 12 bytes.
These instructions use software counters whose maximum counting rate is limited by the 
execution rate of the OB in which they are placed. The OB that the instructions are placed in must 
be executed often enough to detect all transitions of the CU or CD inputs. For faster counting 
operations, see the CTRL_HSC instruction (Page 511). 
Note
When you place counter instructions in an FB, you can select the multi-instance DB option, the 
counter structure names can be different  with separate data structures, but the counter data is 
contained in a single DB and does not require a separate DB for each counter. This reduces the 
processing time and data storage necessary for the counters. There is no interaction between 
the counter data structures in the shared multi-instance DB.
Operation of the counters
Table 8-25 Operation of CTU (count up)
Counter Operation
The CTU counter counts up by 1 when the value of parameter CU changes 
from 0 to 1. The CTU timing diagram shows the operation for an unsigned 
integer count value (where PV = 3).
• If the value of parameter CV (current count value) is greater than or 
equal to the value of parameter PV (preset count value), then the coun‐
ter output parameter Q = 1.
• If the value of the reset parameter R changes from 0 to 1, then the 
current count value is reset to 0.
&8
5
&9
4
 
Table 8-26 Operation of CTD (count down)
Counter Operation
The CTD counter counts down by 1 when the value of parameter 
CD changes from 0 to 1. The CTD timing diagram shows the op‐
eration for an unsigned integer count value (where PV = 3).
•If the value of parameter CV (current count value) is equal to 
or less than 0, the counter output parameter Q = 1.
•If the value of parameter LOAD changes from 0 to 1, the value 
at parameter PV (preset value) is loaded to the counter as the 
new CV (current count value).
 

 &' 
&9 
4/' Basic instructions
8.3 Counter operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
214 System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO
Table 8-27 Operation of CTUD (count up and down)
Counter Operation
The CTUD counter counts up or 
down by 1 on the 0 to 1 transition 
of the count up (CU) or count 
down (CD) inputs. The CTUD tim‐
ing diagram shows the operation 
for an unsigned integer count val‐
ue (where PV = 4).
•If the value of parameter CV is 
equal to or greater than the 
value of parameter PV, then 
the counter output parameter 
QU = 1.
•If the value of parameter CV is 
less than or equal to zero, 
then the counter output pa‐
rameter QD = 1.
• If the value of parameter 
LOAD changes from 0 to 1, 
then the value at parameter 
PV is loaded to the counter as 
the new CV.
•If the value of the reset param‐
eter R is changes from 0 to 1, 
the current count value is re‐
set to 0.
&8
&'
&9
48
4'5
/2$'
     
Counter data retention after a RUN-STOP-RUN transition or a CPU power cycle
If a run mode session is ended with stop mode or a CPU power cycle and a new run mode session 
is started, then the counter data stored in the previous run mode session is lost, unless the 
counter data structure is specified  as retentive (CTU, CTD, and CTUD counters). 
When you accept the defaults in the call options dialog after you place a counter instruction in 
the program editor, you are automatically assigned an instance DB which cannot be made 
retentive . To make your counter data retentive, you must either use a global DB or a Multi-
instance DB.Basic instructions
8.3 Counter operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO 215
Assign a global DB to store counter data as retentive data 
This option works regardless of where the counter is placed (OB, FC, or FB).
1. Create a global DB:
– Double-click "Add new block" from the Project tree
– Click the data block (DB) icon
– For the Type, choose global DB
– If you want to be able to select individual items in this DB as retentive, be sure the 
symbolic-access-only box is checked.
– Click OK
2. Add counter structure(s) to the DB:
–In the new global DB, add a new static tag using one of the counter data types. Be sure to 
consider the Type you want to use for your Preset and Count values.
– In the "Retain" column, check the box so that this structure will be retentive.
–Repeat this process to create structures for all the counters that you want to store in this 
DB. You can either place each counter structure in a unique global DB, or you can place 
multiple counter structures into the same global DB. You can also place other static tags 
besides counters in this global DB. Placing multiple counter structures into the same 
global DB allows you to reduce your overall number of blocks.
– Rename the counter structures if desired.
3.Open the program block for editing where you want to place a retentive counter (OB, FC, or 
FB).
4. Place the counter instruction at the desired location.
5. When the call options dialog appears, click the cancel button. You should now see a new 
counter instruction which has "???" both just above and just below the instruction name.
6.On the top of the new counter instruction, type the name (do not use the helper to browse) 
of the global DB and counter structure that you created above (example: 
"Data_block_3.Static_1"). This causes the corresponding preset and count value type to be 
filled  in (example: UInt for an IEC_UCounter structure).
Counter Data Type Corresponding Type for the Preset and Count Values
 IEC_Counter  INT
 IEC_SCounter  SINT
 IEC_DCounter  DINT 
 IEC_UCounter  UINT
 IEC_USCounter  USINT
 IEC_UDCounter  UDINT
Assign a multi-instance DB to store counter data as retentive data 
This option only works if you place the counter in an FB.Basic instructions
8.3 Counter operations
S7-1200 Programmable controller
216 System Manual, V4.5 05/2021, A5E02486680-AO